Chapter 15

Software as a Service

portals are mostly only providing authentication and access, but we believe there’s
an opportunity for identity providers to extend the breadth and power of their policy
models beyond authentication, and to begin to include authorization.
For example, SaaS applications could start to broadly support account or role
provisioning as part of a Just-in-Time (JIT) access initiative, using a standard such as
SCIM.2 SCIM is only a first step, however, and it’ll be interesting to see whether and how
a standard (whether formal or informal) arises around how to represent authorization.3
We don’t believe that applications will ever fully externalize their authorization,
which in fact is one of the reasons that XACML has not achieved widespread industry
adoption. However, we do believe that we’ll see a commonly accepted way of defining
and communicating authenticated (and therefore trusted) identity context to SaaS
applications, which they can consume and use in ways that are appropriate for their
environment. JIT access provisioning is in fact one narrow example of this.
Without a doubt, this will be an interesting and dynamic space to watch, as we see
how Zero Trust-aware SaaS applications can be, and what type of security, operational,
and business value this will bring. Over time, we believe that these capabilities will
also “trickle down” to non-SaaS applications, but given their sophisticated federation
capabilities and investment in their platforms, we anticipate that SaaS providers will lead
the way.

 CIM is the System for Cross-domain Identity Management. See https://tools.ietf.org/
S
html/rfc7642.
3
Or, for example, if Zero Trust, identity, and SaaS systems begin using existing standards such as
XACML, the eXtensible Access Control Modeling Language.
2

191

CHAPTER 16

IoT Devices and “Things”
Throughout this book, much of our focus has been on controlling access by
authenticated entities—namely, users and servers. What they both have in common are
that they’re authenticated against an identity system, have attributes or roles for context,
and are using modern devices with full-featured operating systems that support the
installation of third-party software. This makes these systems well suited for integration
into the type of Zero Trust architectures that we’ve been discussing. Of course, these are
not the only types of devices—there are billions of connected devices of entirely different
types, running on lower-capability and less extensible hardware and software platforms,
often referred to as Internet of Things (IoT) devices. These devices often coexist on the
same enterprise networks as organizations’ most valuable resources. They are also well-­
known for exhibiting security vulnerabilities and representing an inviting attack surface,
and should be included in any Zero Trust security architecture.
These IoT devices span a wide variety of functions, footprints, and capabilities,
and we’re deliberately including a broad set in our discussion here. We consider this
category of IoT Devices and “things” to include newer connected devices as well as more
traditional devices which exist on enterprise networks. For example
•

Printers

•

VOIP phones

•

IP cameras

•

Badge readers

•

“Smart” things, such as blackboards, light bulbs, etc.

•

Medical or diagnostic devices on healthcare networks

•

HVAC systems

© Jason Garbis and Jerry W. Chapman 2021
J. Garbis and J. W. Chapman, Zero Trust Security, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-6702-8_16

193

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

We also want to consider other types of devices that may be running in widely
distributed locations, and located on public or cellular networks, such as
•

Environmental sensors

•

Remote security cameras

•

Machinery or vehicle sensors or actuators

And finally, there are operational technology (OT) systems focused on industrial
automation and management, which over the past 10–15 years have shifted to using
standardized and interoperable TCP/IP networking, and are more frequently being
connected to enterprise IT networks. Zero Trust architectures can be applied to OT
environments, although they have some differences and challenges compared to IT
environments. However, our focus in this chapter is on IT and enterprise networks.
What all these “things” have in common is that they have an IP address, and need
to initiate or receive communications over the network. We’re also considering these
devices to be relatively closed systems, meaning that enterprises cannot install arbitrary
third-party software onto them. This is not true for all IoT devices, of course—there are
a growing set of such devices based on full-features OSs, typically a variant of Linux,
onto which you can install third-party software. Depending on your environment
and architecture, you could treat these as Zero Trust subjects (i.e., computing devices
with identities), in which case our standard approach of access control and policy
enforcement applies. Or, you can treat them as IoT devices, in which case, the principles
and approaches we’re discussing in this chapter will apply.
In any case, these devices are frequently designed, manufactured, and deployed
without the same degree of concern for security that we expect from enterprise IT
products. There are hundreds of examples of flaws in consumer-grade connected
products, and these also exist in products targeting the enterprise, especially for
specialized vertical products such as medical devices. Common security vulnerabilities
in these devices include the use of unencrypted network protocols, hardcoded default
passwords, unremovable backdoors, network and OS vulnerabilities, difficulty or
impossibility of upgrading firmware, and, for physically accessible devices, the ability for
an attacker to use that proximity to gain shell access on the device.
These devices are definitely a ripe vector for attack and data exfiltration, and have
served as footholds for malware to perform network reconnaissance and move laterally
(not to mention being a favorite weak point for red teams to exploit during pen testing
exercises).
194

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

Note that some IoT devices are deployed as part of a larger, typically cloud-based
modern system—the major cloud service providers each have their own platforms,
which utilize both device-installed and cloud-based software that work in conjunction
to provide messaging, security, and data management, among other services. These
platforms, such as Azure IoT, Google Cloud IoT Core, and AWS Greengrass, each have a
well-designed security and communications model, which in some ways will be self-­
contained with built-in support for secure bidirectional communications (often both
synchronous and asynchronous). As such, it may be perfectly acceptable to deploy and
operate them separately from your overall enterprise Zero Trust model. This is okay—as
we’ve mentioned throughout the book, not everything needs to be included within the
scope of your Zero Trust project. In fact, deliberately excluding certain components of
your IT infrastructure will help with your focus, velocity, and success. However, even if
you are using a modern IoT platform, it’s important to understand its networking and
communications architecture, so that you can ensure it coexists with the rest of your
network security model.
Of course, most IoT devices sit outside of these cloud-based frameworks, and
absolutely should be considered for inclusion in your Zero Trust security architecture.
In the remainder of this chapter, we’ll first examine some of the security and networking
challenges associated with IoT devices, and then look at how Zero Trust systems can be
applied to address these problems.

IoT Device Networking and Security Challenges
Unlike user devices or servers, IoT devices often pose some complex management,
security, and access challenges when deployed onto enterprise networks, due to their
closed nature and often-constrained communications architectures. Figure 16-1 depicts
a simplified view of an enterprise network, to illustrate these points. The network is
made up of both wired and wireless segments, with a wide variety of device types
connected. The wired network in the enterprise has a mixture of user devices and
Ethernet-connected things including VOIP phones, IP cameras, printers, and access
door badge readers. The wireless network is used by some user devices, printers, and
other connected office equipment such as wireless conference room monitors and
digital whiteboards.

195

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

Tablet

IoT Device
Admin

Desktop

Private
Servers
Servers
Servers

Laptop

VOIP Phone
Public
Servers
Servers
Servers

IP Camera
Internet

Badge
Reader
Printer
TV /
Monitor

Access
Point

Whiteboard
Figure 16-1. Enterprise IoT Network
Some of the devices on this network communicate upward to private servers,
running on another segment within the enterprise network, while others connect to
servers across the Internet. There are also a number of system administrators who
periodically need to remotely connect down to these devices, to perform firmware
updates or apply configuration changes. These admins may be employees of the
enterprise, or may work for a device vendor.
196

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

The systems shown in this diagram typically exhibit a number of common security
weaknesses, which we touched on in the introduction. First, many of these devices
use unencrypted network protocols, making them subject to traffic inspection or
Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attacks that can compromise confidentiality, integrity,
and availability. Second, many of these devices have open listening ports. While this
is necessary to permit our remote sysadmin to access them, it also allows any other
network-connected device to establish a TCP connection to them. Third, these devices
often have weak (or hard-coded) authentication mechanisms, and also typically have
network stacks that are vulnerable to a variety of attacks. Finally, some of these devices,
such as outdoor environmental sensors, remote cameras, or control equipment, may
be physically accessible to attackers for long periods of time. As a result, attackers may
be able to hijack a wired network connection, or gain access to the device by physically
compromising it (e.g., by power-cycling it with a malicious USB stick inserted).
Looking at these devices through our Zero Trust security lens, it should be clear
that these systems fall short of meeting our core principles in many ways. Ideally, a Zero
Trust system would provide security for these devices in a way that enforces
•

Principle of least privilege: Minimize the upstream access that these
devices have, in case of device or network compromise.

•

Device isolation: Prevent unauthorized subjects on the network from
connecting to the devices.

•

Traffic encryption: Route native device traffic through a secure and
encrypted tunnel.

Of course, some of these devices (such as wall-mounted badge readers) may be in
an isolated hard-wired network, and others may be assigned to distinct private VLANs in
order to isolate their traffic. Those are good practices, but don’t (and can’t) apply to all
devices, and even when deployed do not make the devices impervious to attacks.
Real-world networks are too often messy, opaque, and heterogeneous, and have
often grown organically without a coherent plan. This is typically due to pressure on
technical staff to get things working as quickly as possible, and not allocating sufficient
time or budget to rework or improve things later. As a result, mixed enterprise networks
with these types of devices can exhibit a number of challenges that make them difficult
to secure. First, these networks tend to be, in practice, flat and open, with hundreds
(or thousands) of diverse sets of devices. This is often due to the difficulty of managing

197

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

traditional (non-Zero Trust) ACLs across a distributed enterprise, and keeping them up
to date and in sync with daily changes. Second, unlike user devices which are typically
centrally managed, these IoT devices are typically either managed as standalone devices
or via a management software system that applies only to devices of a given type. As
such, it’s often difficult and labor-intensive to configure or manage these devices at scale.
But the biggest challenge with these devices, given the inability to install software onto
them, is controlling their network traffic. Specifically, what upstream resources are they
allowed to connect to, and what other systems on the network are allowed to connect to
them. In a Zero Trust system, this is the role of the PEP, of course—either a network PEP,
a user agent PEP, or both. Next, we’ll look at how we can bring these worlds together, and
some of the technical challenges that often arise.

Zero Trust and IoT Devices
Ideally, IoT devices would be deployed onto an isolated and uniform network, with
all north/south network access into the isolated network controlled by a Zero Trust
PEP. This idealized logical state is depicted in Figure 16-2.

198

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

VOIP Phone 1
VOIP Phone 2

PEP
VOIP Phone N

Implicit trust zone
PEP
IP Camera 1

PEP

Servers
Servers
Servers

IP Camera 2

IP Camera N

Implicit trust zone

Figure 16-2. Idealized Zero Trust IoT Network Model
The benefits of this should be clear, as this model achieves each of the three goals
listed previously. First, the principle of least privilege is enforced—all upstream network
traffic from each set of devices is controlled by the PEP, meaning that Zero Trust
policies are applied and enforced on outbound traffic. This blocks attempts to use a
compromised device for data exfiltration, reconnaissance, or DDoS attacks. Second,
these devices are isolated within their own uniform implicit trust zone, so that inbound
traffic must transit the PEP, which enforces access control policies in front of the devices’

199

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

open listening ports. And finally, all traffic is encrypted between the PEPs, overcoming
any native cleartext protocols used by the devices. This eliminates much of the risk of
MITM attacks.
Of course, even this idealized model is imperfect, which is a byproduct of the nature
of these devices. For example, devices within each implicit trust zone can communicate
with one another directly over the LAN, so if one IP camera gets compromised, that
malware may be able to move laterally between peer cameras, although it will be
constrained to this isolated zone, with outbound traffic constrained by the PEP. Another
example—often device identification is based on weak authentication mechanisms,
so an attacker could masquerade as an IP Camera, and obtain the same network
permissions as its peer cameras. There are ways to compensate for these weaknesses,
which we’ll touch on later.
Of course, the idealized view shown in Figure 16-2 is a logical view, and real-world
networks have a variety of technical means they can use to identify and authenticate
devices, assign networks and IP addresses, and route traffic. These are the key functions
that every network and security infrastructure must provide, and they can be combined
in complex ways. Ultimately, a Zero Trust system securing IoT devices must be able to
•

Capture, route, and encrypt traffic to and from these devices

•

Centrally manage access policies

•

Enforce access controls across a distributed set of devices

This is difficult to achieve in a robust fashion on flat, mixed networks like the one
depicted in Figure 16-1. Tables 16-1 through 16-3 show approaches to these functions,
along with the pros and cons of each.

200

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

Table 16-1. How Devices Are Assigned to Networks
Pros

Cons

Physical Cable/
Switch Port

May be a physically isolated
network.

Difficult to change.
Isolation may be limited by switch port capacity.
Difficult to isolate peer network devices.

Private VLAN

Logical separation within one
physical network.

Access granted based on physical network or
switch port access.

Wireless Access Usually simpler to reconfigure
Point
networks.
Built-in device isolation in
many Wi-Fi systems.

Not all devices are Wi-Fi enabled
Simple password authentication is not strong,
and not all devices support WPA-Enterprise.

NAC/802.1x

Dynamic VLAN assignment can Often requires expensive hardware.
isolate devices by type.
Difficult to manage large numbers of VLANs.
Not all devices support 802.1x.

Table 16-2. How Devices Are Identified/Authenticated
Pros

Cons

IP address

Fixed IPs can uniquely identify a device. Configuration and management
overhead.
Weak form of identification, easy to spoof.

MAC Address

Supported on all devices.
Useful for identifying classes of devices
on mixed networks, and assigning to
zones (often with 802.1x).

DHCP
Fingerprint

Supported on almost all devices.
Weak form of identification, easy to spoof.
Reasonably useful for identifying classes
of devices on mixed network.

Certificate via Strong and reliable.
802.1x

Weak form of identification, easy to spoof.

Management and PKI overhead.
Many devices cannot use cert-based
authentication or identification.

201

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

Table 16-3. How Network Routing Is Assigned

Default Network
Gateway

Pros

Cons

Assigned automatically via DHCP.
Fixed and centralized egress
point from LAN is natural policy
enforcement point.

DHCP assignment can’t always
distinguish device types on mixed
networks.
Configuration separate from DHCP
is possible but may be onerous.

Route setting for
Simple to set up and independent of
protected resources by device configuration.
network router

Secures access to destination
resources, but may not filter by
source.
Does not prevent device access to
other resources.

Manually configure
devices

Labor-intensive and difficult to
maintain as networks change.

Fine-grained control of routes.

The simplest and easiest approach is depicted in Figure 16-3, showing a set of
IP cameras deployed onto an isolated and homogeneous network. This could be a
physically isolated, wired network, a VLAN assigned by a NAC, or even a camera-only
wireless network with an isolated SSID. What’s important (and what makes it simple)
is that it’s homogeneous—all devices on that network are the same type, and therefore
have the same set of network access controls applied to them.

202

Chapter 16

IP Camera 1

IoT Devices and “Things”

PEP as default
local network gateway

IP Camera 2

PEP

IP Camera N

PEP

IP Camera Server

IP Camera
Management System

Figure 16-3. IP Cameras on Isolated, Homogeneous Network
The key for this scenario is that the IP cameras on the network have the PEP
configured as their default network gateway, so that all non-LAN traffic is sent to the
PEP, which performs routing and policy enforcement. That is, the PEP is the only egress
point from the local zone. The cameras’ default network gateway assignment could be
performed centrally via the IP camera management system, or via a DHCP server for the
camera-only segment.
In any case, it should be clear that is as close to the ideal scenario as possible, making
it simple to integrate into a Zero Trust model. Our next scenario, depicted in Figure 16-4,
is more typical, and more difficult to control.

203

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

Network 192.168.112.0/20
192.168.112.57

192.168.112.28

Desktop

Laptop

192.168.112.35

Test
Equipment 1

192.168.112.11

Test
Equipment 2

Router

192.168.112.54
PEP

PEP

192.168.112.58

Test
Equipment N

Test
Equip.
Server

10.6.20.2

Figure 16-4. Heterogeneous Enterprise Network
This diagram shows a mixed (heterogeneous) network segment, 192.168.112.0/20,
consisting of hundreds of computers and devices throughout a flat enterprise network
in one office building. The devices on this network have essentially random IP addresses
assigned to them from the subnet range, via DHCP, and the organization doesn’t have
an accurate CMDB. This scenario presents a number of challenges to achieving our
goals—which are to ensure that only the Test Equipment devices are permitted to access
the Test Equipment server, that no other devices can access that server, and that access
to the Test Equipment devices is controlled by policy. Unfortunately, in this real-world
scenario, we cannot meet all these goals without making changes to the network. This is
to be expected in many enterprise scenarios, even outside of IoT devices—but at the very
least, you need to be aware of your network’s shortcomings and determine how to solve
these problems, even if you cannot solve them immediately.

204

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

Let’s examine what can (and cannot) be achieved here, focusing on securing
upstream network access from the Test Equipment. That is, the enterprise needs a way
to ensure that Test Equipment-initiated traffic destined for the Test Equipment server
(10.6.20.2) on the remote network gets routed to the local PEP for enforcement and
forwarding via the secure tunnel. This can be achieved in three possible ways:
•

Default gateway configured directly on Test Equipment

•

Default gateway assigned to the Test Equipment via DHCP

•

Static or dynamic routing on the network

Configuring the default network gateway directly on the Test Equipment may be
possible, depending on whether it technically supports this. It also depends on how
labor-intensive a process this is. Performing this through a centralized management
system is straightforward while requiring individual manual changes across
hundreds of devices may be a non-starter. Assigning the PEP as the default network
gateway via DHCP, for all devices, may also be a viable approach in some cases.
In some cases, the DHCP server may be able to assign different default network
gateways for different devices, if the DHCP assignment can accurately distinguish
between DHCP requests initiated by the Test Equipment, vs. those issued by other
devices,1 and return different values.
Finally, it’s also possible to configure the network router to send network
traffic bound for the remote Test Equipment Server (10.6.20.2) to the local PEP
(192.168.112.54). This has the advantage of not requiring any other changes to the
network, but then requires that the PEP have some ability to distinguish legitimate traffic
(initiated by a Test Equipment device) from illegitimate traffic (e.g., initiated by malware
on a user’s device performing network reconnaissance). This will be difficult to achieve
in our scenario, since IP addresses are randomly assigned, and there is no CMDB. It’s
possible for the PEP to use MAC addresses to distinguish devices, but these are a weak
form of identification that can be trivially spoofed, and therefore carries some risk if it’s
used in this fashion.

For example, by examining DHCP fingerprints.

1

205

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

Summary
Like many areas of our real-world networks and systems, IoT devices are often complex
and difficult to manage. Zero Trust can help, in many (if not most) situations, but
typically cannot provide as robust a level of security as it can with standard enterprise
devices (user systems and servers). Zero Trust PEPs can be used to control upstream
device access to protected resources, to ensure that network traffic is encrypted, and to
control downstream access to IoT devices—with varying degrees of effectiveness, based
on the many factors we’ve discussed in this chapter.
As you look at your enterprise to identify candidate IoT systems for inclusion in
your Zero Trust project, there are a few characteristics that you can look for to help you
identify well-suited IoT systems. First, understand how these devices’ networking is
configured, and prefer IoT devices that have a centrally managed mechanism to control
these easily at scale. Second, look for areas of your network that are well understood
and reasonably well documented. Avoid trying to secure IoT devices on an unmanaged,
diverse, and opaque network as an early project—you need to make sure you have some
experience and success applying your Zero Trust architecture to IoT systems in simpler
and more well-understood environments. And finally, look for some “low hanging fruit”
around securing remote third-party user access to internal devices. Zero Trust’s ability to
require a business process, such as the creation of a service desk ticket, prior to access,
can deliver real security value, quickly.
IoT devices are definitely a nascent area for Zero Trust and, as we’ve explored here,
tend to be complex and highly technical and can often be a minefield of older and
inflexible technology. But there’s a lot of opportunity for improvement, and we’ve only
scratched the surface on this topic—this could be an entire book in its own right. If this is
a primary use case for your Zero Trust project, explore carefully and be sure to perform
a pilot project in your intended environment to validate the technology’s compatibility.
Some important questions to ask yourself include

206

•

How complex and mature are your device networks?

•

Do you have an accurate and reliable inventory of the devices and
their communications patterns?

•

How easy or hard is it to capture device network traffic for
enforcement by a PEP?

Chapter 16

IoT Devices and “Things”

•

What network changes will be required, and what impact will they
have on other networked devices?

•

What network protocols do these devices use? Are they connection-­
oriented or connectionless protocols? Are they encrypted?

Finally, of course, different Zero Trust implementations will approach this
differently, and it’s important to clearly understand the capabilities of your chosen Zero
Trust solution and deployment model for this use case. Some products and architectures
will support these scenarios well, while others will struggle. Having said that, we think
Zero Trust systems can bring a great deal of value to often-insecure IoT ecosystems,
and we encourage you to investigate whether your organization’s environment is a good
candidate.

207

PART III

Putting It All Together
In Part II of this book, we took the Zero Trust principles and architectures from Part I,
and used them as our lens to examine a broad set of components across enterprise
IT and security architectures. Ranging from on-premises and cloud-based network
infrastructure to security and non-security components, this analysis hopefully provided
you with a deep understanding of the ways in which Zero Trust can impact your
enterprise. This should have armed you with a set of tools, patterns, and perspectives
with which you can begin to construct your enterprise’s journey to Zero Trust.
Here in Part III, we’ll be concluding our journey by building on these foundations.
We’ll begin with what is in many ways the keystone of Zero Trust—the policy model,
in Chapter 17. Recall our architectural premise is that a Zero Trust system is made up
of a set of distributed policy enforcement points, and a centralized policy decision
point. From this perspective, the policies that get defined, evaluated, and ultimately
enforced are arguably the most important part of the system. What this means is that the
policy model in your chosen Zero Trust implementation—its language and structure,
which will be reflected in that product’s deployment models and policy enforcement
capabilities—will have a large impact.
After we discuss the policy model, we’ll bring things back to more concrete reality
in Chapter 18, by looking at seven of the most common Zero Trust use cases, and how
your organization should approach them. We’ll examine each one from an architectural
perspective, discussing considerations and recommendations.
Finally, in Chapter 19, we’ll wrap up our journey (and help you begin yours) with
discussion and guidance on how you can plan for successful Zero Trust deployments,
projects, and initiatives. We’ll look at this both from a top-down organizational and
program perspective and from a bottom-up tactical project point of view. We’ll also look
at common roadblocks to Zero Trust initiatives, and how to best overcome them.
Let’s dive in, and start our work of bringing all these ideas together into a coherent
whole.

CHAPTER 17

A Zero Trust Policy Model
Policies are at the heart of Zero Trust—after all, its primary architectural components
are Policy Decision Points and Policy Enforcement Points. The term policy is heavily
overloaded in the English language, of course, with meanings at many different levels. In
our Zero Trust world, policies are the structures created by organizations to define which
identities are permitted to get access to which resources, under which circumstances.
Recall that within a Zero Trust environment, access can only be obtained through the
evaluation and assignment of a policy to an identity, and that access may be enforced at
the network or application levels.
The actual, technical, means by which policies are defined and enforced will be
product- and implementation-dependent, but the concepts and components are
universal, and should be pervasive in any Zero Trust system. The NIST Zero Trust
document states “policy is the set of access rules based on attributes that an organization
assigns to a subject, data asset, or application,”1 and one of the NIST core tenets is that
“access to resources is determined by dynamic policy—including the observable state
of client identity, application/service, and the requesting asset—and may include other
behavioral and environmental attributes.”2 Recall from our working definition in Chapter 2,
Zero Trust must “enable the dynamic enforcement of security policies.”
As we introduced briefly in Chapter 3, we’re adding structure and specificity to
the policy discussion, extending some of the concepts within the NIST Zero Trust
framework. We’re also weaving in and leveraging industry concepts around Attribute-­
Based Access Control (ABAC), re-interpreting them from the perspective of Zero Trust.
Our goal with this chapter is to provide you with a framework and a structure with
which you can think about the scope of your Zero Trust system, and with which to
evaluate vendor platforms. Zero Trust systems can be nearly infinite in breadth and
depth, and it’s important for you to have a strong sense of what should and shouldn’t

 IST Zero Trust Architecture, page 6
N
Ibid

1
2

© Jason Garbis and Jerry W. Chapman 2021
J. Garbis and J. W. Chapman, Zero Trust Security, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-6702-8_17

211

